---
layout: post
title:  "Control"
date:   2016-05-15 18:25:00 +0200
categories: Deleuze Control Discipline 

---

Gilles Deleuze's prescient "Postscript on the Societies of Control" presents an incisive analysis of the transition from *disciplinary societies* to *control societies*. In doing so, the essay? adds another chapter to Foucault's historical tracing of the topology of power. Whereas the latter described punitive form of power giving way to discipline in the 17th century and the right of the sovereign to biopower in the 19th to form the bipolar mass/indivudal system characteristic of modern capitalism, the former sketches the disintegration of this static, concentrated, and enclosed configuration in favor of one characterized by virtualization, disruption, and modulation.

> Different control mechanisms are inseparablevariations, forming a system of variable geometry the language of which is numerical...

(...)
> ...Controls are a modulation, like a self-deforming cast that will continuously change from one moment to the other, or like a sieve whose mesh will transmute from point to point.

^(Deleuze, 4)


The reverberations of this ongoing change constitute the nature of most of the upheavals constituting contemporary society, from the mundane to the far-reaching, and from those recognized by leftist to those hailed by silicon valley: the informatization of everything, the undermining of democracy through trade agreements, the proliferation of identities, the ubiquitous embedding of social networks, the pervasive surveillance of the same, the waging of perpetual drone warfare, the spread of automated technologies, the emergence of blockchain technology, the ongoing crises...

Ideally, this blog will function as a space to chart, and comment on, examples of these processes - transparently, and fully aware of its functioning within within and through these systems.

>There is no need to ask which is the toughest ormost tolerable regime, for it's within each of them that liberating and enslaving forces confront one another.

^(Deleuze, 4)

---

- Deleuze, Gilles. 1992. "Postscript on the Societies of Control." *October* 59: 3-7.